PRESENT PROBLEM:


Right now, we are focusing too much on the asymmetry of power. And focusing on the surface level feelings of hurt.


The fact that Thailand is using their strength to obliterate us. The feeling of victimization has returned. Thailand is just evil.


And we’re not wrong to feel hurt and hard done by.


WHAT WE DO KNOW IS:


- We can’t end the conflict militarily.


- So we are utilizing the international community angle. But if it takes its natural course/timeline via intl. pressure (which is no longer guaranteed because the world order has shifted in the past 5-6 years, and how larger powers ‘police’ things aren’t the same anymore), we will lose a lot more. Of people. Of land. Of pride. And the old pattern remains, ready to be triggered 10-20 years from now. Within unknown global circumstances that may put Cambodia at a further disadvantage.


If the conflict continues, we rob Thailand of the opportunity to clean its own karma, and we entrench our neighbor siblings further into dense energy as they continue down their path. The perpetrators of suffering cannot escape its own suffering.


And we aren’t free unless we are all free.


——


SOLUTION:


Energetic/Mindset:


We need a return back to the belief that everyone is human, and that Thailand can be reasoned with. To hold space for the belief that Thailand have their reasons for doing what they are doing. And it’s not necessarily ‘evil’. Or that they ‘hate’ us. That they are just human - and humans can be petty.


Then, we have to enter the mind of Thailand. We have to battle their beliefs with softness and understanding.


Practical:


1) We need to hold the spirit of accountability very strong. But the spirit can only be held, if we hold ourselves accountable through the process as well.


2) And then I think we need to do a historical deep dive back to shared culture. A return back to the root of it all.




The sensitive part that I need your help with is: framing self accountability. And that means responding with maturity to their grievances.


Acknowledgements that would soften Thailand:


- can we recognize the leaked phone call is humanly and professionally disrespectful no matter the conduct of the other side? No looking at the small details, of ‘yeah, but it’s cuz of this and that’s. Just to pause and recognize the human essence.
- can we acknowledge our BM-21 rockets are imprecise and outdated, and has indeed hit civilian areas? Can we acknowledge that a Khmer life is no more valuable than a Thai life, and that we have indeed also killed?
- is there a possibility that poor communication from top to bottom/deficiency in military discipline can exist, and perhaps actions on the ground are inconsistent with leadership directive?
- can we acknowledge that over the years, Cambodia may have fostered a business environment where scam centers/operations were allowed to thrive? Maybe we hoped for a trickle-down effect onto the economy (net positive for the country, knowing full well there are negative implications). Can we acknowledge that there are perhaps individuals in power, just like in other places, who turned the other cheek for personal enrichments?
- can we the people acknowledge that in our own anger and hurt (which we perceive to be righteous), we’ve viciously lashed back, disrespecting symbols of their King, characterizing their country in negative ways? That we’ve said things which, when the dust settles, we recognize isn’t helpful to ourselves or anyone?
- can we acknowledge the perception of militarily basing ourselves out of temple areas?


——


The Big tactical one: is there a possibility that we did plant new landmines?


I personally don’t think we did at all, but can we return dialogue back to this core trigger for this recent round of clashes?


This acknowledgment by Khmer voices would soften Thailand and return the dialogue back to the evidence table. Ask in sincerity to publish everything and examine together - What happened to those photos they claimed to have? The phone they claimed to seize. Where is the metadata?


And the big disclaimer is: Cambodia would hold its hands up to say, my bad if the evidence does show that we indeed planted it. We will recognize without twisting the narrative, that we indeed fucked up. Are we, as a nation, ready to do that?


If one of us is caught not telling the truth, can we collectively acknowledge it? Can Thailand promise to do the same?


The self-accountability approach is key because it will force Thailand to the table of reflection themselves. Fresh air once again.


Then we can even elaborate on the scam centers - why are so many scam centers nestled near the shared border? :D Could it be that these multi-national scams also include Thailand-based interests?? If it was simply Cambodia’s shenanigans, why would we have them close to Thailand at all? I’m just spitballing but these are some of the questions that can come up, if we lead by example.


They harp on the scam center stuff because at the heart of scamming is Lying. ‘Don’t believe cambodia, they are Liars.’


So the deep antidote is to Accept.


I’m not a politician but there has to be a strategically sound statecraft way to Accept without Conceding.




We are stuck in this he-said she-said loop.


I think we can end the loop with the energy of accountability. And it’s not personal, this energy - it’s universal.


And we want Thailand to take accountability for their actions, but we know that generally speaking,


No one will arrive there from feeling guilty, from being insulted. People in fact, double down on their positions. This is people 101.


So we have to find a way to become the mirror for ourselves, and for them.


It would clean the air.


Can we acknowledge that history is complicated, and that the modern day borders are and forever will be complicated?


Can we acknowledge that Thailand did not ‘steal’ from us, but simply the Siam Kingdom was a civilizational continuation of the Khmer Empire? Can we acknowledge that all civilizations end overtime, no matter how powerful? Can we acknowledge that Thailand has taken what we made and evolved it? And that in their own right, they have become something beyond their originator?


Can they acknowledge that Cambodia is not making it up when we remind them of the origin? And that it’s important to respect their roots and where they came from - otherwise? Can they acknowledge that their clamoring to assert ‘truth’ at all cost may stem from this refusal to acknowledge their roots? And therefore it produces their existential anxiety?


History demands evolution.
Ayutthaya learned from Angkor.
It is natural that there is a civilizational successor.
Show me a civilizational power that has not collapsed. We are going through the collapse of the US empire right now.


In acknowledging our shared past without victim energy,


I believe we return back to elder energy. Because they came from us, we hold the key to reconciliation. We just have to unlock it. We have to claim it, without belittling Thailand. It takes 2 hands to clap, and so we remove our hand. It will trigger a moment of silence, and an opportunity to collectively re-member.


We have to re-member ourselves back to each other. And it begins by processing our own grief.


We have the opportunity of lifetimes to rewrite how on a collective level, we deal with conflict.


The opportunity to dismantle the principles of realpolitik that have dominated world affairs for so long.


The opportunity can only arrive via conflict - that is the point. We can woe-is-me, but in doing so, we lose the window to energetically reconfigure our national spirit, or we can find wisdom to lead in spite of the pain.


I think it has to be an anonymous letter


The framing is an appeal to universal truths:


- we aren’t infallible, we too are capable of making mistakes.
- it takes 2 hands to clap. We too contributed to escalation.


On a political level - I just think Thailand feels disrespected. Their leadership feels small. Things are chaotic. So it’s bullying and gaslighting time. I think. I can’t understand what would be beyond this for this current moment anyways.


We have to hold space for their emotions, and strategically provide an off-ramp for them to save face.


And of course, they want to save face at OUR expense. But the beauty of self-accountability is: that method won’t work - the solution can’t be at our expense, if we totally accept our share of the responsibility (and not merely perform responsibility). Accountability is not embarrassing. Accountability is wise.